ECONOMICS

                                                PAPER—I

1.    Advanced Micro Economics :

(a)   Marshallian and Walrasian Approaches to Price determination.

(b)   Alternative Distribution Theories : Ricardo, Kaldor, Kalecki.

(c)   Markets Structure : Monopolistic Competition, Duopoly, Oligopoly.

(d)   Modern Welfare Criteria : Pareto Hicks and Scitovsky, Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem, A. K. Sen’s
      Social Welfare Function.

2.    Advance Macro Economics :

      Approaches to Employment Income and Interest Rate determination : Classical, Keynes (IS-LM)
      curve, Neo-classical synthesis and New classical, Theories of Interest Rate determination and
      Interest Rate Structure.

3.    Money-Banking and Finance :

(a)   Demand for and Supply of Money : Money Multiplier Quantity Theory of Money (Fisher, Pigou and
      Friedman) and Keynes’ Theory on Demand for Money, Goals and Instruments of Monetary
      Management in Closed and Open Economies. Relation between the Central Bank and the Treasury.
      Proposal for ceiling on growth rate of money.

(b)   Public Finance and its Role in market economy : in stabilization of supply, allocation of resources
      and in distribution and development. Sources of Government revenue, forms of Taxes and Subsidies,
      their incidence and effects. Limits to taxation, loans, crowding-out effects and limits to borrowings.
      Public expenditure and its effects.

4.    International Economics :

(a)   Old and New theories of International Trade.

      (i) Comparative advantage,

      (ii)Terms of Trade and offer curve.

      (iii)Product cycle and Strategic trade theories.

      (iv)Trade as an engine of growth and theories of underdevelopment in an open economy.
                                                    62

(b)    Forms of protection : Tariff and quota.

(c)    Balance of Payments Adjustments : Alternative Approaches.

       (i)Price versus income, income adjustments under fixed exchange rates.

       (ii)Theories of Policy mix.

       (iii)Exchange rate adjustments under capital mobility.

       (iv)Floating Rates and their implications for developing Countries: Currency Boards.

       (v)Trade Policy and Developing Countries.

       (vi)BOP, adjustments and Policy Coordination in open economy macro-model.

       (vii)Speculative attacks.

       (viii)Trade Blocks and Monetary Unions.

       (ix) WTO : Trims, TRIPS, Domestic Measures, Different Rounds of WTO talks.

5.     Growth and Development:

(a)    (i)Theories of growth : Harrod’s model;

       (ii)Lewis model of development with surplus labour.

       (iii)Balanced Unbalanced Growth.

       (iv)human capitals and Economic Growth.

       (v)Research and Development and Economic Growth.

(b)    Process of Economic Development of less developed countries: Myrdal and Kuznets on economic
       development and structural change: Role of Agriculture in Economic Development of less developed
       countries.

(c)    Economic Development and International Trade and Investment, Role of Multinationals.

(d)    Planning and economic Development: changing role of Markets and Planning, Private-Public
       Partnership.

(e)    Welfare indicators and measures of growth—Human development indices. The basic needs
       approach.

(f)    Development and Environmental Sustainability—Renewable and Non Renewable Resources,
       Environmental Degradation, Intergenerational equity development.


                                                 PAPER-II
Indian Economy in Pre-Independence Era :

       Land System and its changes, Commercialization of agriculture Drain theory, Laissez faire theory
and critique. Manufacture and Transport: Jute, Cotton, Railways, Money and Credit.

Indian Economy after Independence :

A.     The Pre-Liberalization Era :

       (i) Contribution of Vakil, Gadgil and V.K.R.V. Rao.

       (ii)Agriculture: Land Reforms and land tenure system, Green Revolution and capital formation in
       agriculture.
                                                       63

         (iii)Industry Trends in composition and growth, Role of public and private sector, Small scale and
         cottage industries.

         (iv)National and Per capita income : patterns, trends, aggregate and Sectoral composition and
         changes therein.

         (v) Broad factors determining National Income and distribution, Measures of poverty, Trends in
         poverty and inequality.

 B.      The Post Liberalization Era :

         (i)New Economic Reform and Agriculture: Agriculture and WTO, Food processing, subsidies,
         Agricultural prices and public distribution system, Impact of public expenditure on agricultural
         growth.

         (ii)New Economic Policy and Industry: Strategy of industrialization, Privatization, Disinvestments,
         Role of foreign direct investment and multinationals.

         (iii)New Economic Policy and Trade: Intellectual property rights : Implications of TRIPS, TRIMS, GATS
         and new EXIM policy.

         (iv)New Exchange Rate Regime: Partial and full convertibility, Capital account convertibility.

         (v)New Economic Policy and Public Finance : Fiscal Responsibility Act, Twelfth Finance Commission
         and Fiscal Federalism and Fiscal Consolidation.

         (vi)New Economic Policy and Monetary system. Role of RBI under the new regime.

         (vii)Planning: From central Planning to indicative planning, Relation between planning and markets
         for growth and decentralized planning: 73rd and 74th Constitutional amendments.

         (viii)New Economic Policy and Employment: Employment and poverty, Rural wages, Employment
         Generation, Poverty alleviation schemes, New Rural, Employment Guarantee Scheme.


                                         ELECTRICAL     ENGINEERING
                                                   PAPER-I

1.       Circuits—Theory :

         Circuit components; network graphs; KCL, KVL; Circuit analysis methods : nodal analysis, mesh
analysis; basic network theorems and applications; transient analysis : RL, RC and RLC circuits; sinusoidal
steady state analysis; resonant circuits; coupled circuits; balanced 3-phase circuits. Two-port networks.

2.       Signals and Systems :

         Representation of continuous-time and discrete-time signals and systems; LTI systems; convolution;
impulse response; time-domain analysis of LTI systems based on convolution and differential/difference
equations. Fourier transform, Laplace transform, Z-transform, Transfer function. Sampling and recovery of
signals DFT, FFT Processing of analog signals through discrete-time systems.

3.       E.M. Theory :
         Maxwell’s equations, wave propagation in bounded media. Boundary conditions, reflection and
refraction of plane waves. Transmission lines : travelling and standing waves, impedance matching, Smith
chart.
4.       Analog Electronics :
                                                      64

       Characteristics and equivalent circuits (large and small-signal) of Diode, BJT, JFET and MOSFET.
Diode circuits : Clipping, clamping, rectifier. Biasing and bias stability. FET amplifiers. Current mirror;
       Amplifiers : single and multi-stage, differential, operational feedback and power. Analysis of
amplifiers; frequency-response of amplifiers. OPAMP circuits. Filters; sinusoidal oscillators : criterion for
oscillation; single-transistor and OPAMP configurations. Function generators and wave-shaping circuits.
Linear and switching power supplies.
5.     Digital Electronics :
       Boolean algebra; minimisation of Boolean functions; logic gates; digital IC families (DTL, TTL, ECL,
MOS, CMOS). Combinational circuits : arithmetic circuits, code converters, multiplexers and decoders.
Sequential circuits: latches and flip-flops, counters and shift-registers. Comparators, timers, multivibrators.
Sample and hold circuits, ADCs and DACs. Semiconductor memories. Logic implementation using
programmable devices (ROM, PLA, FPGA).
6.     Energy Conversion :
       Principles of electromechanical energy conversion : Torque and emf in rotating machines. DC
machines : characteristics and performance analysis; starting and speed control of motors. Transformers :
principles of operation and analysis; regulation, efficiency; 3-phase transformers. 3-phase induction
machines and synchronous machines : characteristics and performance analysis; speed control.
7.     Power Electronics and Electric Drives :
       Semi-conductor power devices : diode, transistor, thyristor, triac, GTO and MOSFET-static
characteristics and principles of operation; triggering circuits; phase control rectifiers; bridge converters :
fully-controlled and half-controlled; principles of thyristor choppers and inverters; DC-DC converters;
Switch mode inverter; basic concepts of speed control of dc and ac motor drives applications of variable-
speed drives.
8.     Analog Communication :
       Random variables : continuous, discrete; probability, probability functions. Statistical averages;
probability models; Random signals and noise : white noise, noise equivalent bandwidth; signal
transmission with noise; signal to noise ratio. Linear CW modulation : Amplitude modulation : DSB, DSB-
SC and SSB. Modulators and Demodulators; Phase and Frequency modulation : PM & FM signals; narrows
band FM; generation & detection of FM and PM, Deemphasis, Preemphasis. CW modulation system :
Superhetrodyne receivers, AM receivers, communication receivers, FM receivers, phase locked loop, SSB
receiver Signal to noise ratio calculation or AM and FM receivers.


                                                  PAPER II
1.     Control Systems :
       Elements of control systems; block-diagram representations; open-loop          & closed-loop systems;
principles and applications of feed-back. Control system components. LTI systems : time-domain and
transform-domain analysis. Stability : Routh Hurwitz criterion, root-loci, Bode-plots and polor plots,
Nyquist’s criterion; Design of lead-lad compensators. Proportional, PI, PID controllers. State-variable
representation and analysis of control systems.
2.     Microprocessors and Microcomputers :
       PC organisation; CPU, instruction set, register set timing diagram, programming, interrupts, memory
interfacing, I/O interfacing, programmable peripheral devices.
                                                     65

3.     Measurement and Instrumentation :
       Error analysis; measurement of current voltage, power, energy, power-factor, resistance, inductance,
capacitance and frequency; bridge measurements. Signal conditioning circuit; Electronic measuring
instruments : multimeter, CRO, digital voltmeter, frequency counter, Q-meter, spectrum-analyser,
distortion-meter. Transducers : thermocouple, thermistor, LVDT, strain-guage, piezo-electric crystal.
4.     Power Systems: Analysis and Control :
       Steady-state performance of overhead transmission lines and cables; principles of active and reactive
power transfer and distribution; per-unit quantities; bus admittance and impedance matrices; load flow;
voltage control and power factor correction; economic operation; symmetrical components, analysis of
symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults. Concepts of system stability : swing curves and equal area criterion.
Static VAR system. Basic concepts of HVDC transmission.
5.     Power System Protection :
       Principles of overcurrent, differential and distance protection. Concept of solid state relays. Circuit
breakers. Computer aided protection : introduction; line, bus, generator, transformer protection; numeric
relays and application of DSP to protection.
6.     Digital Communication :
       Pulse code modulation (PCM), differential pulse code modulation (DPCM), delta modulation (DM),
Digital modulation and demodulation schemes : amplitude, phase and frequency keying schemes (ASK,
PSK, FSK). Error control coding : error detection and correction, linear block codes, convolution codes.
Information measure and source coding. Data networks, 7-layer architecture.
