ZOOLOGY

                                                    PAPER–I

1. Non-chordata and Chordata :

(a) Classification and relationship of various phyla up to subclasses: Acoelomate and Coelomate,
                                                       151

Protostomes and Deuterostomes, Bilateria and Radiata; Status of Protista, Parazoa, Onychophora and
Hemichordata; Symmetry.

(b)      Protozoa: Locomotion, nutrition, reproduction, sex; General features and life history of
Paramaecium, Monocystis. Plasmodium and Leishmania.

(c)      Porifera: Skeleton, canal system and reproduction.

(d)      Cnidaria: Polymorphism, defensive structures and their mechanism; coral reefs and their
formation; metagenesis; general features and life history of Obelia and Aurelia.

(e)      Platyhelminthes: Parasitic adaptation; general features and life history of Fasciola and Taenia and
their-Pathogenic symptoms.

(f)      Nemathelminthes: General features, life history, parasitic adaptation of Ascaris and Wuchereria.

(g)      Annelida: Coelom and metamerism; modes of life in polychaetes; general features and life history
of Nereis, earthworm and leach.

(h)      Arthropoda: Larval forms and parasitism in Crustacea; vision and respiration in arthropods (Prawn,
cockroach and scorpion); modification of mouth, parts in insects (cockroach, mosquito, housefly, honey bee
and butterfly), metamorphosis in insect and its hormonal regulation, socialbehaviour ofApis and termites.

(i)      Molluscs: Feeding, respiration, locomotion, general features and life history of Lamellidens, Pila
and Sepia. Torsion and detorsion in gastropods.

(j)      Echinodermata: Feeding, respiration, locomotion, larval forms, general features and life history of
Asterias.

(k)      Protochordata: Origin of chordates; general features and life history of Branchiostoma and
Herdmania.

(l)      Pisces: Respiration, locomotion and migration.

(m)      Amphibia: Origin of tetrapods, parental care, paedomorphosis.

(n)      Reptilia; Origin of reptiles, skull types, status of Sphenodon and crocodiles.

(o) Aves: Origin of birds, flight adaptation, migration.

(p)      Mammalia: Origin of mammals, dentition, general features of egg laying mammals, pouched-
mammals, aquatic mammals and primates, endocrine glands (pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal,
pancreas, gonads) and their interrelationships.

(q)      Comparative functional anatomy of various systems of vertebrates. (integument and its derivatives,
endoskeleton, locomotory organs, digestive system,. respiratory system, circulatory system including heart
and aortic arches, urinogenital system, brain and sense organs (eye and ear).

2. Ecology :

(a) Biosphere: concept of biosphere; biomes, Biogeochemical cycles, Human induced changes in atmosphere
including green house effect, ecological succession, biomes and ecotones, community ecology.

(b)      Concept of ecosystem; structure and function of ecosystem, types of ecosystem, ecological
succession, ecological adaptation.

(c)      Population; characteristics, population dynamics, population stabilization.

(d)      Biodiversity and diversity conservation of natural resources.
                                                      152

(e)      Wildlife of India.

(f)      Remote sensing for sustainable development.

(g)      Environmental biodegradation; pollution and its impact on biosphere and its prevention.

3. Ethology :

(a) Behaviour: Sensory filtering, responsiveness, sign stimuli, learning, and memory, instinct, habituation,
conditioning, imprinting.

(b) Role of hormones in drive; role of pheromones in alarm spreading; crypsis, predator detection, predator
tactics, social hierarchies in primates, social organization in insects;

(c) Orientation, navigation, homing; biological rhythms: biological clock, tidal, seasonal and circadian
rhythms.

(d) Methods of studying animal behaviour including sexual conflict, selfishness, kinship and altruism.

4. Economic Zoology :

(a)      Apiculture, sericulture, lac culture, carp culture, pearl culture, prawn culture, vermiculture.

(b)      Major infectious and communicable diseases (malaria, filaria, tuberculosis, cholera and AIDS) their
vectors, pathogens and prevention.

(c)      Cattle and livestock diseases, their pathogen (helminths) and vectors (ticks, mites, Tabanus,
Stomoxys).

(d)      Pests of sugar cane (Pyrilla perpusiella), oil seed (Achaeajanata) and rice (Sitophilus oryzae).

(e)      Transgenic animals.

(f)      Medical biotechnology, human genetic disease and genetic counselling, gene therapy.

(g)      Forensic biotechnology.

5. Biostatistics :

Designing of experiments; null hypothesis; correlation, regression, distribution and measure of central
tendency, chi square, student-test, F-test (one-way & two-way F-test).

6. Instrumentation methods :

(a) Spectrophotometer, phase contrast and fluorescence microscopy, radioactive tracer, ultra centrifuge,
gel . electrophoresis, PCR, ELISA, FISH and chromosome painting.

(b) Electron microscopy (TEM, SEM).

                                                  PAPER II
1. Cell Biology :
(a)    Structure and function of cell and its organelles (nucleus, plasma membrane, mitochondria, Golgi
bodies, endoplasmic reticulum, ribosomes and lysosomes), cell division (mitosis and meiosis), mitotic
spindle and mitotic apparatus, chromosome movement chromosome type ploytene and lambrush,
organization of chromatin, heterochromatin, Cell cycle regulation.

(b)    Nucleic acid topology, DNA motif, DNA replication, transcription, RNA processing, translation,
protein foldings and transport.

2. Genetics :
                                                        153

(a) Modern concept of gene, split gene, genetic regulation, genetic, code.

(b) Sex chromosomes and their evolution, sex determination in Drosophila and human.

(c)     Mendel’s laws of inheritance, recombination, linkage, multiple alleles, genetics of blood groups,
pedigree analysis, hereditary diseases in human.

(d)     Mutations and mutagenesis.

(e) Recombinant DNA technology, plasmid, cosmid, artificial chromosomes as vectors, transgenics, DNA
cloning and whole animal cloning (principles and methods).

(f)     Gene regulation and expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

(g)     Signal molecules, cell death, defects in signaling pathway and consequences.

(h)     RFLP, RAPD and AFLF and application of RFLP in DNA finger-printing,           ribozyme technologies,
human genome project, genomics and protomics.

3. Evolution :

(a) Theories of origin of life.

(b) Theories of evolution; Natural selection, role of mutation in evolution, evolutionary patterns, molecular
drive, mimicry, variation, isolation and speciation.

(c)     Evolution of horse, elephant and human using fossil data.

(d)     Hardy-Weinberg Law.

(e)     Continental drift and distribution of animals.

4. Systematics :

Zoological nomenclature, international code, cladistics, molecular taxonomy and biodiversity.

5. Biochemistry :

(a) Structure and role of carbohydrates, fats, fatty acids, cholesterol, proteins and amino-acids, nucleic
acids. Bioenergetics.

(b) Glycolysis and Krebs cycle, oxidation and reduction, oxidative phosphorylation; energy conservation and
release, ATP, cycl cyclic AMP-its structure and role.

(c) Hormone classification (steroid and peptide hormones), biosynthesis and functions.

(d) Enzymes: types and mechanisms of action.

(e) Vitamins and co-enzymes.

(f) Immunoglobulin and immunity.

6. Physiology (with special reference to mammals) :

(a) Composition and constituents of blood; blood groups and Rh factor in human; factors and mechanism
of coagulation; iron metabolism, acid-base balance, thermo regulation, anticoagulants.

(b) Haemoglobin: Composition, types and role in transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide.

(c) Digestion and absorption: Role of salivary glands, liver, pancreas and intestinal glands.

(d) Excretion: nephron and regulation of urine formation; osmo-regulation and excretory product.

(e) Muscles: Types, mechanism of contraction of skeletal muscles, effects of exercise on muscles.
                                                     154

(f) Neuron: nerve impulse—its conduction and synaptic transmission; neurotransmitters.

(g) Vision, hearing and olfaction in human.

(h) Physiology of reproduction puberty and menopause in human.

7. Developmental Biology :

(a) Gametogenesis; spermatogenesis, composition of semen, in vitro and in vivo capacitation of mammalian
sperm, Oogenesis, totipotency; fertilization, morphogenesis and morphogen; blastogeneis, establishment of
body axes formation, fate map, gestulation in frog and chick; genes in development in chick homeotic genes,
development of eye and heart, placenta in mammals.

(b) Cell lineage, cell to cell interaction, Genetic and induced teratogenesis, role of thyroxine in control of
metamorphosisin amphibia, paedogenesis and neoteny, cell death, aging.

(c) Developmental genes in human, in vitro fertilization; and embryo transfer; cloning.

(d) Stem cells: Sources, types and their use in human welfare.

(e) Biogenetic law.
                                                      155

                                                APPENDIX- II

             INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES FOR FILLING ONLINE APPLICATIONS

      Candidates are required to apply Online using the website https://upsconline.nic.in.

      Detailed instructions for filling up online applications are available on the above mentioned website
under ‘Instructions and FAQs’ -> ‘Instructions for Filling the form.’

      Candidates are advised to go through the General instructions, Profile/Module wise instructions and
instructions for uploading of documents before proceeding to fill up the form. A candidate who is willing to
apply for Civil Services Examination shall be required to submit the requisite information and supporting
documents towards various claims, such as date of birth, educational qualification, etc. as may be sought
by the Commission alongwith the Universal Registration Number (URN), Common Application Form (CAF)
and the fourth module i.e. Examination Specific module (including fees and centre etc.).

      The candidate should have details of one Photo ID Card viz. Aadhar Card/ Voter Card (EPIC) / PAN
Card / Passport/ Driving License / Any other photo ID card issued by the State / Central Government. The
details of this photo ID will have to be provided by the candidate while filling up the online application form.
This photo ID will be used for all future references and the candidate is advised to carry this Photo ID while
appearing for the Examination/Personality Test.

      The Online applications (Part I, Part-II, Part-III and Part-IV) can be filled from 04 th February, 2026
to 24th February, 2026 till 18:00 Hrs.

      Applicants should not submit multiple applications.

      The applicants must ensure that while filling their Application Form, they are providing their valid
and active E-Mail IDs as the Commission may use electronic mode of communication while contacting them
at different stages of examination process.

      The applicants are advised to check their emails at regular intervals and ensure that the email
addresses ending with @ nic.in and @ gov.in are directed to their inbox folder and not to the SPAM folder or
any other folder.

      Candidates are strongly advised to apply online well in time without waiting for the last date for
submission of Online Applications.
